In this video, we're going to be taking
our very first steps towards
independence from platforms like Claude
Code, Anti-Gravity, and the like by
building out our own custom agent in Pi.
I'm going to tell you exactly what Pi
is, why it's worth consideration, and
how to get it set up. This is less a
tutorial because I haven't done it yet
myself. We're going to be doing that
together. More about why this is so
important and why it goes along with
what we've been talking about on the
channel for a little while. Let's dig
in. Okay, so here we are on pi.dev and I
think the most important place to start
would be what the heck is Pi? And Pi is
an agent harness, right? Much like
Claude Code or Codex or whatever, but
this is more like a toolkit for agent
integrations. This is actually powering
some of the most popular projects on the
planet right now, most notably Open
Claw. The entire Open Claw ecosystem and
all that stuff is built on top of Pi.
So, very much unlike Claude Code and
Open Claw, Pi is designed to be minimal.
The idea being that you can customize
this to match your use case
specifically, rather than all the extra
you would get from downloading Open Claw
or Claude Code. You get just what you
need and nothing else. And it's tailored
specifically for the way that you work
with AI agents. So much so that out of
the box, they only have four tools:
read, write, edit, and bash. So, it can
read the contents of a file, it can
write file contents, it can edit or
replace exact text in a file, and it can
run bash commands in a terminal. Cuz
they figure, as it turns out, that's
really all you need for an effective
coding agent. So, why build more tools
on top of that if you don't actually
need them. Any of the models you bring
in already know how to use bash. They've
also been trained on read, write, and
edit tools with the same sort of input
schemas. And they're arguing, you
compare this to Claude Code's tool
definitions, and it's just all
unnecessary bloat. The amazing part
about this is Pi's system prompt and
tool definitions for a working coding
assistant together are below 1,000
tokens. Compared to Claude Code or Open
Claw's sometimes 12 to 16,000 input
tokens, this is incredibly efficient,
which is perk number one. While this is
super great for efficiency and keeping
things absolutely to their leanest,
there are a few things that you may take
for granted from more off-the-shelf
harnesses like Claude Code. The idea is
that it's extensible. They give you the
chassis and you just put in the pieces
that you want. So, out of the box, no
MCP, but again, extensible. No sub
agents, no plan mode, no built-in
to-do's, no background bash. All that
stuff you can add with extensions or
skills or build out your own sort of
integrations like that. But the one I do
want to talk about is no permissions.
This is always running in like the go
dangerously or yellow mode, whatever you
want to call it. It's yellow by default.
So, Pi runs in full-on admin, so it
doesn't, you know how when you're
running in Claude Code, you have to
click yes if like you want to edit a
file, you have to give it permissions.
This doesn't do that. So, I guess this
is kind of a disclaimer because there's
a lot of folks that used Open Claw in
the early days and they put themselves
in a wreck because of this specific
feature. It has unrestricted access to
your file system and can execute any
command without permission checks or
safety rails. No permission prompts, no
pre-checking of bash commands for
malicious content, full file system
access access and can execute any
command with your user privileges. So,
it's seriously like you sitting down at
the desk doing things yourself. The good
thing here though is, unlike Open Claw
that had all of these pre-built
connections and a lot of different bloat
and instructions, this is specifically
what you tell it to do. So, at least you
know exactly what its capabilities are
because you're building it from the
ground up. That said, I'm comfortable
moving forward with Pi, but even in
their own documentation, it says, "If
you're uncomfortable with full access,
run Pi inside a container or don't
bother."
Anyway, that's the disclaimer side of
things out of the way. Okay-dokey, so
that answers the first question, what
the heck is Pi? It's a agent toolkit
that gives you the keys, right? And that
leads directly into why would you
consider Pi instead of something like
Open Claw or Claude Code that's already
built out? So, like we alluded to
before, all of those other like
pre-built packages, like the Claude
Codes of the world, Open Claw in
particular, comes with a massive product
overhead. Not just in system prompts and
tools and stuff, but there's a lot of
connections here that you absolutely
don't need, but you're still paying for
in terms of token and compute. Like,
check it out. Okay, so you got like
WhatsApp, Telegram. You got all these
different things. It says like 50 plus
integrations, right? How many of us use
all of these? But we're still paying for
every single one. Like I was saying,
same thing with Claude Code. There's a
lot of different tool definitions and
all sorts of stuff that you might never
actually use, but they're still part of
your agent. This is the raw toolkit that
you can build out absolutely anything
you want tailored to work the way that
you want. Just like Peter Steinberger
did with Open Claw, you can start with
Pi and build out absolutely anything you
want on top of it to work exactly the
way that you need it to. You have
absolute full control and transparency.
The git's right here. You can build
anything you want on top of it. And I
think that is insanely important. The
most viewed videos on my channel have a
lot to do with how terms of use changes
are affecting the average person. And
I've got like a couple hundred comments
on each of those. I've talked to like a
thousand people that have experienced
the same frustration where the model
isn't working the same as it used to, or
they can't even get through a whole week
with the same subscription anymore. So,
I think it is more important as time
goes on to move away from reliance on
these larger tech companies and AI
providers and just build your own custom
solution. Which is what we've been
saying on this channel for a little
while now. Not just with the Obsidian
Vault and all that stuff, but like going
back to my days of the AI personal
assistants, if you're one of the OGs,
you'll know that I was against Open Claw
because you're taking someone else's
personal agent and applying it to your
use case, which probably doesn't match
up, right? You want to make sure that
you have the keys. They're yours. Okay,
so we got what is Pi, we got why is Pi,
let's do how is Pi? So, it's just So,
it's the same as you would with any of
these other little packages. We're going
to go to bash and just copy that. npm
install. Here we go.
Okay, so I'm going to go check the
version now just to make sure that it's
installed. All right, so Pi's installed.
I got ham fingers and I uh
>> [laughter]
>> gave it an error. I'm going to move this
down here. I'm going to go like this so
you can see. Okay, so it downloaded a
bunch of different dependencies and
stuff that it needed. Read the blog
post. Fantastic. I'm in here. It says
auto 400,000 token context. But the
question I have is it is
saying it's running on GPT-5.1 Codex and
I'm curious
where it's charging. Like if it's taking
my Codex
install here and using that. Okay, so
the cool thing is it's is it's already
found my agents.md, but the question I
have is if it's using my Open AI
subscription or like how I'm connected
at the moment.
So, I'm going to ask just straight away.
We're connected through the Pi coding
agent environment you launched from
running inside that harness.
Found it. Okay, so it is actually
pulling from my Open Router API key
automatically
in my OS environment variables, which is
sick. I'm going to double-check that
actually right now. So, that is really
interesting. I've got Open Router API
key in my environment variables and Pi
picked up on that immediately.
Um that's awesome because I don't have
to like run that config. Just to catch
you up, okay? Because that was kind of
cool. Open Router is a service that has
access to every AI model all under one
API key, right? There's some free ones,
there's uh you have access to like Opus
4.6, like literally everything. Very
first step, if you want to get this set
up just like I did, is go to
openrouter.ai
and then get an API key. Sign up, go to
the main page, and just click get API
key. You're going to get your API key
and then you're going to put it in your
system environment variable like so so
that you never ever ever
Boop. It'll look like this on Windows.
There's another way to do it with Mac.
It's also very easy. But you never have
to have them in a file that could be
shared on GitHub. Or let's say you're
making YouTube videos and it
accidentally sneaks in there and you
have to like, you know, rotate your
entire Right? So, you go to boop.
You go to create and you type it in. Be
like, like and subscribe.
Which would really help me out. If you
look at my analytics, it says that only
5% of you guys are actually subscribed
to the channel. So, if you take a second
right now to like and subscribe the
video, that super helps me out. It also
gives you an opportunity to see more of
the content that I put out like this and
you can learn some more. Anyway, so
we're going to go create. Boop boop
boop. And then I'm going to go and take
this key and save it just like I said.
I'm going to delete this for the time
being so that nobody steals my
Boop. There you go. Okay, so that's how
you get your Open Router API keys. I'm
probably going to end up using the Pi
agent to build the Pi agent. But the
cool thing here is that you can you can
do that. Essentially, that's uh that's
my favorite part. Yeah, so what I'm
going to try and do is I'm going to try
and log in with my
OAuth provider, which is Codex at this
point, Anthropic, GPT plus. Browser
window should open. Where?
>> [laughter]
>> Copy this and go check this out. Oh,
okay. So, that worked. I couldn't do
through my duckduckgo browser because of
probably pop-up blockers or something
like that. So lame. I had to use my
default web browser, but it um here we
are. So, now I'm using my Codex Codex
subscription instead of my Open Router,
which is sick. But I should be able to
swap models.
There you go. So, I can use any of
these. Okay, that's sweet. It goes
through Codex and Open Router. Amazing.
Wow, okay. So, here we are set up.
Bare-bones tools. It's just reading my
agents.md. So, it does know how to
behave. Now, we really want to get this
customized though, right? Let's like
build this out to make it like awesome.
I think what I want to do is see how it
loads off of a cold start. What are we
going with?
Codex.
Open AI Codex GPT-5.4. Okay, let's just
see what happens. I'm going to go like
this and check if we have anything from
GPT-5.4.
Negative. Okay, so this is on my Open AI
subscription, which is dope. So,
essentially, this is Codex working in
Pi. Okay, man. Honestly, this is kind of
unreal how the fastest part of this
entire thing was the actual install of
this agent. So, the nice thing is we can
use Pi to help it build out our agent.
We can use Pi to help build Pi. One of
the things people are talking about
that's really cool with the Pi agent is
you'll be able to like reskin it, which
you can't do with Claude Code and Codex
and whatnot. I'm not sure how that'll
work in my Obsidian Vault and like just
the extension here. But I'm going to
say, "Create a pixel art western theme
set up for Pi. I want 16-bit Super
Nintendo style graphics. Use your
imagination."
Bad instructions. But anyway, I want
include a slash command to toggle this
on and off. Let's just give this a go.
See what we come up with. Off. Exploring
Pi themes. I need to create a Pi themed
extension.
Building this out. Reading the dot Hey,
there you go.
So, logging in to GitHub. Seeing what we
can do. While that was going, I'm just
going to build out a convention for the
slash commands that I already had
established, right? Can you build out
slash commands for all the workflows in
our workflows folder? Copy that path.
Follow the convention used in the Claude
commands, though for those only in the
workflows directory.
Go. Let's see where we're at. Created.
All right. So, how to use
slash western
on. Okay. So, slash reload.
Woah. Gross.
Sness western. Sunset bites cactus. I'm
not sure what that is, but it did it.
There you go. All right. Delete all
things western mode.
Saloon prompts. There you go. Done. I
added the missing slash commands and for
every
created Claude commands content writer.
Now you misunderstood. I need this to
work in Pi the way it had in Claude
code. For Pi, these needs to be prompt
template. It's not commands. I've now
built them in prompts.
One prompt template per workflow and 39
workflows.
39 Pi slash commands. Okay, great. All
available as workflow name
arguments. So, let's go slash reload.
Oh, dude. Check it out. Okay. So, it
actually turned all of these into
sick project prompts, which are skills.
Okay. So, add captions.
All that stuff. So, let's go slash add
captions. Dude. It it Okay. So, it
brought in
all of my skills as slash commands with
Pi. All right. So, the state of affairs
right now is I'm going to spend a lot of
time building this out and whatever. But
as it is, this is one agent hub for my
Codex subscription and my open router
config with all of my slash commands and
hooks and stuff brought into the same
place, which is dope. So, I'm going to
build this out and take a look at some
of the packages that are available. I'm
really interested in changing the UI so
that I can maybe like dig into sub
agents and have like different writing
modes and content creation and that kind
of thing. But that is a different video.
Like I said, I'm doing this live with
you guys. I haven't explored this too
too much, but I have an idea what I
would like to build out. Kind of loving
the idea of cutting back on all the
different commands I have to do. I just
go Pi and now I've got everything in the
one place. I'm going to definitely have
more videos on this. If you're
interested in the Obsidian vault that
we're building out here, I've got a
couple videos on it. You can check them
out on my channel. Or you can get the
whole thing for yourself in my school
community. You just go to tools and
agents and everything will be built out
in there. I'm going to leave this setup
prompts for just getting Pi off the
ground in like a GitHub gist like I have
been in the past. But as I build out
this custom harness, I'm going to make
sure that that is in here as well. If
you made it this far in the video and
you're not already part of the school
community, I think you're going to be a
great fit. It's free to try. We're
already almost at a thousand members and
everybody in there is super helpful and
we're all working towards the same goal
of building cool stuff and making some
money online. Anyway, thanks for hanging
out. Let me know how you're going to use
this sort of technology in the comments
and we'll catch you in the next one.